The proposed project will allow experimentalists to easily, more quickly and with less errors, build their own experimental setups, with open-source software and hardware. This will significantly enlarge the neuroscientific community building their own experiments. With the help of AI the degree of sophistication of these experiments will greatly increase, empowering neuroscience experimentation and producing unprecedented findings.

The addition of LLM nodes into Bonsai workflows will drastically increase the power of Bonsai experiments, leading in the long-term to experiments that automatically generate and test novel hypothesis, accelerating scientific discovery. In particular, this addition will be critical to Aeon, a platform for collecting naturalistic, long-duration and continual behavioral and electrophysiological data from small animals. The relevance of the data generated by Aeon to Neuroscience is like the relevance of Image Net to computer vision, as it creating massive datasets of behavior and brain function. In week- or month-long experiments, an LLM node can infer, based on real-time probabilistic machine learning inference provided by Bonsai.ML, and based on its large contextual information, that parameters in the experiment need to be adjusted, and do so in real time, saving the waste of week- or month-log improperly collected data.

With the guidance of AI, experimentalists will be able to better exploit the recently created Bonsai.ML package, upgrading their experimental setups with advanced Bayesian ML functionality.

Bonsai, being used by thousands of user around the world, is a unique source of data for ML method developers interested in real-time processing. The Bonsai AI assistant will facilitate the integration of ML functionality from these developer into the Bonsai ecosystem, therefore helping the growth of downstream software.
